Archives of Disease in Childhood, 1985, 60, 823-828
Association of diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus,
optic atrophy, and deafness
The Wolfram or DIDMOAD syndrome
S S NAJJAR, M G SAIKALY, G M ZAYTOUN, AND A ABDELNOOR
Departments of Pediatrics, Otolaryngology, and Microbiology, American University of Beirut Medical
Center, Beirut, Lebanon
SUMMARY Seven patients with a rare syndrome of diabetes insipidus (DI), diabetes mellitus
(DM), optic atrophy (OA), neurosensory deafness (D), atony of the urinary tract, and other
abnormalities (Wolfram or DIDMOAD syndrome) are reported. Of the seven patients, three
siblings were followed up for 10-17 years.
All seven patients had diabetes mellitus and optic atrophy; six had diabetes insipidus; and in
the four patients investigated there was dilatation of the urinary tract. The severity of diabetes
varied, and all required insulin for control of the hyperglycaemia. In one patient the course of the
disease simulated maturity onset diabetes of the young; another presented with ketoacidosis; but
none had haplotypes usually associated with insulin dependent diabetes mellitus. The diabetes
insipidus responded to chlorpropamide, suggesting partial antidiuretic hormone deficiency.
Onset of optic atrophy and loss of vision occurred relatively late and progressed slowly, although
in one patient there was a rapid deterioration in visual acuity. Deafness was mild, of late onset,
and of sensorineural origin.
Adegenerative process affecting the central and peripheral nervous system can explain all the
manifestations of the syndrome except diabetes mellitus. The pathogenesis of the diabetes
mellitus remains obscure.
DIDMOAD syndrome, also known as Wolfram
syndrome, is an acronym for diabetes insipidus,
diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and sensorineural
deafness. Hydronephrosis, hydroureters, and dilata
tion of the urinary bladder are less commonly
associated findings. Other rare manifestations in
clude cerebellar dysfunction, oesophageal dyspha
gia, delayed puberty, aminoaciduria, anosmia, de
posits of pigments in the retina, electrophoto
graphic changes, colour blindness, episodic vertigo,
and dysautonomia with labile regulation of body
temperature. This syndrome is inherited as mende
lian recessive with varying expressivity. Diabetes
mellitus and primary optic atrophy are the most
salient features. Several of the manifestations are
progressive in nature. About 100 reported cases
have been reviewed recently.1-3
We report on seven patients with DIDMOAD
syndrome and describe the course of the disease in
three siblings followed up for a period of 10-17
years.
Subjects and methods
Since 1966 DIDMOAD syndrome has been di
agnosed in seven patients, two girls and five boys,
at the American University of Beirut Medical
Center. Three were siblings, a girl and two boys
(cases 1, 2, and 3); the sister (case 2) had been
reported previously in 1968.4 The age; sex; and age
at onset of diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus, and
visual and auditory changes are summarised in
Table I.
HLA-A, HLA-B, HLA-C, and HLA-DR were
determined by the microcytotoxicity test using
antisera obtained from the Behring Institute.5 HLA
A, HLA-B, HLA-Cw2, HLA-Cw3, HLA-Cw4, and
HLA-DR 2 were determined in the three siblings
(cases 1, 2, and 3), their father, and unaffected
brother. In one patient (case 6) only the HLA-DR
profile was determined (Table 2).
Loss of hearing was classified according to the
shape of the audiogram and speech discrimination
823
824 Najjar, Saikaly, Zaytoun, and Abdelnoor
Table 1 Clinical presentation
Sex
Age when last seen (years)
Height growth centile* on last visit
Weight growth centile* on last visit
Age (years) at onset of:
Polyuria, polydipsia
Diabetes mellitus
Diabetes insipidus
Optic atrophy
Decreased visual acuity
,#Decreased audible acuity
Abnormal audiogram
Dilatation of urinary tract
Case no
1
M
24
<3
<3
5
7
No
24
17
17
Yes
Yes
National Centre for Health Statistics growth charts.
Not studied.
Table 2 HLA typing* of three
unaffected brothert
2
F
23
3
5
3
6
6
6
7
20
Yes
3
M
16
<3
<3
4
5
5
12
12
13
Yes
siblings, parents, and
Haplotype
Father
Father ~
Motherf
Mothe4
Case I
Case 2
Case 3
Unaffected brother
~ a
lb
~~~id
dc
ad
bd
ac
ac
HLA type
A3 B40
A25 Aw32 B13
A2 Bw2l
A9 Bw55
* In addition, case 6 was DR5 positive, DR2 negative.
t All were negative for HLA-DR2, Cw2, Cw3, and Cw4.
t Haplotype assumed from offspring.
score. Histopathologic correlation was also ana
lysed, by the method described by Schuknecht.6
Results
Diabetes mellitus. Six patients (cases 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
and 7) presented with polyuria and polydipsia, and
the seventh patient (case 6) presented with diabetic
ketoacidosis; all had diabetes. The average age at
onset of diabetes was 5*7 years (range 4-8 years); all
required treatment with insulin. Six patients were
known diabetics at presentation. The average
duration between the diagnosis of diabetes and,
presentation was three years. The average fasting
blood glucose concentration at presentation was
24-1 mmol/l (range 4-8-47 mmol/l); average serum
carbon dioxide concentration was 18 mmol/l (range
5-27 mmol/l). Two patients (cases 3 and 6) had
ketonuria at presentation. One patient (case 5)
stopped insulin treatment on three occasions. On
the first, his blood glucose and carbon dioxide
concentrations were 36-5 mmol/l and 15 mmol/l,
respectively and he had no ketonuria eight months
4
F
12
15
20
4
4
11
9 7/12
9 5/12
No
No
Yes
5
M
10
25
25
4 6/12
5
8
8
8
No
Yes
Yes
6
M
14
<3
<3
7 6/12
8
13
14
14
No
No
Yes
7
M
10
10
15
5
5
10 3/12
10 3/12
10
No
Yes
after stopping treatment. On the second, he had
glycosuria but no ketonuria one month after dis
continuing insulin treatment, and on the third
occasion he had a serum glucose concentration of
50 mmol/l and carbon dioxide concentration of
18 mmol/l without ketonuria on the fifth day after
stopping treatment. Three patients had severe
limitation in mobility of the proximal inter
phalangeal joints. One patient had retinal prolifera
tive changes. None was hypertensive or had gross
proteinuria.
Diabetes insipidus. Diabetes insipidus was recog
nised in five patients and suspected in a sixth. The
average age at diagnosis of diabetes insipidus was
8-8 years (range 5-11 years).
Diabetes insipidus was shown by water depriva
tion test or hypertonic saline infusion test in five
patients. In one patient neither test was performed;
he had polyuria and polydipsia unrelated to glyco
suria, which both decreased after the administration
of chlorpropamide. Five of the six patients with
diabetes insipidus responded to treatment with
chlorpropamide with an average reduction in
volume of urine of 65% (range 50-80%). One
patient (case 5) showed no response to treatment
with chlorpropamide but did respond to intra
muscular Pitressin Tannate in oil.
Ophthalmologic findings. Optic atrophy was present
in all seven patients. The average age at diagnosis of
optic atrophy was 12 years (range 6-24 years). Six
patients had decreased visual acuity, which led to
the diagnosis. One patient (case 2) was found to
have optic atrophy on routine physical examination.
The average age at onset of decreased visual acuity
was 10*8 years (range 7-17 years). Only one patient
had a diabetic retinopathy.
Association of diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and deafness 825
One patient (case 1) had 20/20 vision in both eyes
and normal fundi between 8 and 14 years of age. At
24 years of age his vision was limited to near face
hand motion, and he had bilateral optic atrophy and
proliferative diabetic retinopathy. He was not seen
between ages 14 and 24 years. Another patient (case
2) had a visual acuity of 20/20 in both eyes and
normal visual fields at 6 years of age. Fundoscopy
showed questionable bilateral temporal pallor of the
optic discs with retinal pigmentary degeneration and
absent foveal reflex in the macular area. Five years
later her visual acuity decreased to 20/40 bilaterally.
Her visual fields showed generalised constriction,
and the temporal pallor of the optic discs became
more pronounced. At 14 years of age her visual
acuity became 20/100 bilaterally, the visual fields
developed central defect, and she had optic atrophy.
By 23 years of age she had visual acuity of near face
hand motion, and the macula and vessels were
normal.
Afurther patient (case 3) had normal visual acuity
and a normal fundoscopic examination when first
seen at 5 years of age. At 12 the visual acuity had
reduced to six meters in both eyes, and he had
bilateral optic atrophy. At 16 years his visual acuity
decreased to 3*5 m counting fingers.
One patient (case 4) had vision of 20/20 in both
eyes with normal visual fields and fundi when first
seen at the age of 6. At 10 years she complained of
decreased visual acuity; her vision was 20/50
bilaterally. Visual fields showed bilateral temporal
field defects and generalised constriction; she had
mild pallor of the optic discs. Three months later her
vision decreased to 20/70 bilaterally and pallor of the
optic discs was more pronounced, especially on the
left hand side. There was no further progression 12
months later.
In one (case 5) there was decreased visual acuity
by the age of 8; his vision was then reduced to
counting fingers at 2-5 m in the right eye and 5 m in
the left eye. There was a generalised constriction in
his visual fields, poor discrimination of colours
(green, red, and blue), and he had bilateral optic
atrophy.
Two patients (cases 6 and 7) had reduced visual
acuity and bilateral optic atrophy when first seen at
14 and 10 years of age, respectively. In addition, in
case 6 there were pigmentary changes in the retina.
Audiological findings. Decreased hearing was
present in the three siblings. Two patients (cases 4
and 6) had abnormal audiograms without subjective
evidence of hearing loss. Cases 5 and 7 had normal
audiograms. The average age at onset of decreased
hearing was 16-6 years (range 13-20 years).
Three patients (cases 1, 4, and 6) had bilateral
symmetrical hearing loss, and two others (cases 2
and 3) had a bilateral non-symmetrical pattern.
High frequency sensorineural hearing loss with a
sharp descending pattern starting at 2 kHz was
noted in four patients (cases 2, 3, 4, and 5). Speech
discrimination scores were 96% (normal=96% or
above), and the average speech reception threshold
was 22 5 db (range 0-40 db) (normal=0 db). This
was consistent with a sensory type of hearing loss
(affection of the organ of Corti).6 Cases 1 and 4 had
a flat audiogram curve pattern with equal thresholds
at all frequencies; the speech reception threshold
was 37*5 db (range 30-40 db). This audiometric
pattern was consistent with atrophy of the stria
vascularis, the main source of 'nutrient' supply to
the inner ear.6 Audiograms from two patients (cases
2 and 3) showed persistently descending threshold
patterns with speech discrimination score of 80%
and speech reception threshold of 45 and 60 dbs,
respectively. These findings, consistent with Schuk
necht's 'cochlear conductive hearing loss', indicate a
degenerative process in the spiral ligament (a
fibrous structure within the cochlea) on which the
structural integrity of sense organs depends.
Audiograms performed on the father and brother
of the three affected siblings were normal. Evoked
response audiometry of cases 1, 3, and 4 showed no
retrocochlear condition.
HLA typing. Table 2 shows the results of HLA
typing. No patient had the antigens commonly
associated with insulin dependent diabetes melli
tus-namely HLA-B8 and HLA-B15. None had the
HLA-DR2 antigen, which has been suggested to be
associated with DIDMOAD.
Radiological findings. Intravenous pyelography and
voiding urethrocystogram were performed on four
patients (cases 1, 4, 5, and 6) at the ages of 23, 10, 9,
and 13 years, respectively. Case 1 did not have
diabetes insipidus. Intravenous pyelography showed
bilateral and severe hydronephrosis and hydro
ureters in cases 1, 5, and 6 and mild bilateral
vesicourethral reflux but no hydronephrosis in case
4. Voiding urethrocystogram examination showed
large flaccid atonic urinary bladders in cases 1, 4,
and 6.
Three patients (cases 1, 5, and 6) had spina bifida
occulta. One patient (case 6) had a normal myelo
gram; four (cases 1, 2, 3, and 7) had normal skull
radiographs; and two (cases 1 and 4) had normal
computed tomograms of the skull.
Other findings. One patient (case 7) had cerebellar
deficits on neurological examination. Another
patient (case 1) had dysphagia and intolerance to
826 Najjar, Saikaly, Zaytoun, and Abdelnoor
cold. Three patients who had reached pubertal age
did not have hypogonadism.
All seven patients were small and underweight for
age. None had vertigo or hyperpyrexia. Our patients
were not tested for aminoaciduria.
Family history. Three patients (cases 1, 2, and 3)
were siblings whose parents were distant relatives;
their other brother and sister were not affected. The
paternal grandfather had adult onset diabetes melli
tus. Oral glucose tolerance tests performed on the
parents were normal. Audiograms, visual fields, and
fundoscopy performed on the father and unaffected
brother were normal. HLA typing was performed
on the siblings, the father, and the unaffected
brother; Table 2 shows the results. The parents of
one patient (case 5) were first cousins. The parents
of the rest of the patients were not consanguineous.
One patient (case 6) was the third in a sibship of
four. The father and paternal grandmother had
adult onset diabetes mellitus.
Discussion
The presence in addition to the severity, age at
onset, and rate of progress of the manifestations of
the various components of the DIDMOAD syn
drome were not uniform in our patients.
Diabetes mellitus, present in all our patients, was
a universal finding in previously reported cases.1-3
Diabetes mellitus was the first manifestation in our
seven patients compared with 76% of the cases
reviewed by Cremers et al.1 All our patients
required treatment with insulin to control the
diabetes. The severity of diabetes mellitus, how
ever, was variable; one patient was admitted with
ketoacidosis, suggesting insulin dependent diabetes
mellitus, and another patient had a course sugges
tive of maturity onset diabetes of the young. On
three occasions after discontinuing treatment with
insulin this patient failed to develop ketosis or
acidosis. Recurrent ketonuria and ketoacidosis were
not a problem in any or our patients. Variations in
the severity of diabetes mellitus in DIDMOAD
syndrome have been reported by others. The
patients reported by Bretz et al were described as
requiring low dose insulin.7 One patient described
by Richardson and Hamilton discontinued treat
ment with insulin for several months but did not
develop ketosis.8 The patients reported by Page et
al, however, rapidly developed ketonuria and two
had ketoacidosis.9
The HLA antigens in our four patients were not
consistent with those most commonly associated
with insulin dependent diabetes mellitus-namely,
HLA-B8 Dw3 and HLA-B15 Dw4. Other reports
also failed to find an association of these antigens in
patients with DIDMOAD syndrome.10-2 Monson
and Deschamps et-al found HLA-DR2 antigens in
their patients with DIDMOAD syndrome.10 1 Such
an HLA association was not found in our patients or
those reported by Stanley et al.12 Our findings
(Table 2) present evidence against the linkage of
DIDMOAD gene to chromosome 6 (major histo
compatibility region) as the three affected siblings
each received a different combination of haplotypes
from the parents. Dreyer et al found a normal
number of insulin receptors on red blood cells and
normal affinity of these receptors to insulin in two
patients with DIDMOAD syndrome.2 No other
studies of insulin receptors in such patients have
been reported.
Limited mobility of joints was found in three of
our patients-namely, in the three siblings with the
longest duration of diabetes mellitus. Only one
patient, the eldest of the three siblings, had diabetic
retinopathy. Whether the variations in the course of
diabetes mellitus in our patients represent a het
erogeneity in the aetiology or a spectrum of severity
of the disease is difficult to ascertain, particularly as
plasma concentrations of proinsulin or the C peptide
were not determined.
Diabetes insipidus was present in six of our
patients. In other reported series the incidence of
diabetes insipidus has varied from 40-60%. The
response of six of our patients to chlorpropamide is
consistent with partial antidiuretic hormone de
ficiency as chlorpropamide is thought to improve the
symptomatology of diabetes insipidus, either by
enhancing the action of antidiuretic hormone on the
distal tubules and collecting ducts'3 or by increasing
the secretion of antidiuretic hormone.14 The ameli
oration of the symptoms of diabetes insipidus in
patients with DIDMOAD syndrome after admini
stration of chlorpropamide has been reported by
others.7 9 Richardson and Hamilton,8 however,
found low concentrations of serum antidiuretic
hormone in three patients with DIDMOAD
syndrome that did not increase after water depriva
tion.8
The diagnosis of diabetes mellitus preceded that
of diabetes insipidus in all our patients. This is not a
universal finding, however; diabetes insipidus has
been described to precede diabetes mellitus in
patients with DIDMOAD syndrome.'
The diagnosis of diabetes insipidus was probably
delayed in many patients because of the common
symptomatology of polyuria and polydipsia in both
diseases. After diabetes mellitus has been diagnosed
the persistence of symptoms is often related to poor
control of the diabetes mellitus rather than the
presence of diabetes insipidus.
Association of diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and deafness 827
Optic atrophy was present in all our patients. This
finding was universal in patients reviewed in other
series.1-3 The average age at onset of decreased
visual acuity was 10 years. The rate of progress was
variable, spanning over several years in some and
precipitous in others. Deterioration of vision, from
normal to near blindness, was found in the three
siblings with the longest follow up. This is in accord
with the findings ofLessell and Rosman.15
The otologic findings in this group of patients
indicate that deafness was not universal and when
present was moderate, slowly progressive, bilateral,
and of the sensorineural pattern. From the study of
the audiogram patterns a degenerative process
appeared to occur, involving multiple sensory or
supportive structures in the cochlea. Such findings
have been noted in histopathologic studies of
temporal bones in patients with similar findings.
Abnormalities of the urinary tract, particularly
dilatation of the bladder, were present in the four
patients who underwent urologic investigations. The
incidence of these findings in the patients reviewed
by Cremers et al was only 13%,' which was probably
an underestimation of the true incidence of dilata
tion of the urinary passages in DIDMOAD syn
drome as this manifestation is usually asymptomatic
and several of the patients had not been investigated
systematically for its presence.
The less common manifestation of DIDMOAD
syndrome found in our patients were short stature,
colour blindness, deposits of pigments in the retina,
cerebellar dysfunction, intolerance to cold, and
dysphagia.
The aetiology of DIDMOAD syndrome remains
undetermined. The syndrome is inherited as an
autosomal recessive disease, as suggested by the
genetic studies of pedigrees reported previously.16
The progressive course of diabetes insipidus, optic
atrophy, deafness, and possibly the dilatation of the
urinary passages may be explained by a gradual
neuronal degenerative process. Niemeyer and Mar
quardt and Carson etal reported degeneration of the
optic nerve and tract in addition to degeneration of
the geniculate bodies, the pons, and the cerebellum
at necropsy of patients who had had DIDMOAD
syndrome. 17 18 Gunn et al and Carson etal described
degeneration of the supraoptic and paraventricular
nuclei in patients with DIDMOAD syndrome suf
fering from diabetes insipidus.19 18 Loss of hearing
could also be explained on the basis of a degenera
tive process involving the stria vascularis, the sen
sory and neural end organs, but sparing the retro
cochlear portion of the auditory system, as sugges
ted by the audiologic findings in our patients. The
dilatation of the urinary passages has been ascribed
to diabetes insipidus by the regression of these
findings after treatment with Desamino-d-Arginin
Vasopressin20 or Pitressin.9 The presence of these
changes in the absence of diabetes insipidus in one
of our patients (case 1) and in the patient reported
by Dreyeretafi suggests that aneuronal degenerative
process may also be implicated in the pathogenesis
of the dilatation of the urinary tract.
The only finding that cannot be explained by a
degenerative process of the central or peripheral
nervous system in patients with DIDMOAD syn
drome is the severe intolerance to carbohydrates.
The aetiology of diabetes mellitus in this syndrome
remains obscure. The type of diabetes mellitus seen
in our patients does not fit into any of the commonly
accepted classifications of the disease because of the
clinical and biochemical heterogeneity, the lack of
an HLA association, and, in the few studied, the
finding of normal numbers and affinities of insulin
receptors.
References
l
Cremers CW, Wijdeveld PGAB, Pinckers AJLG. Juvenile
diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, hearing loss, diabetes insipidus,
atonia or the urinary tract and bladder, and other abnormalities
(Wolfram syndrome). A review of 88 cases from the literature
with personal observations on 3 patients. Acta Paediatr Scand
[Suppli 1977;1:3-16.
2 Dreyer M, Rudiger HW, Bujara K. et al. The syndrome of
diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, deafness
and other abnormalities (DIDMOAD syndrome): two affected
sibs and a short review of the literature (98 cases), Klin
Wochenschr 1982;60:471-5.
3Khardori R, Stephens JW, Page OC, Dow RS. Diabetes
mellitus and optic atrophy in two siblings: a report on a new
association and a review of the literature. Diabetes Care
1983;6:67-70.
4 Najjar SS, Mahmud J. Diabetes insipidus and diabetes meilitus
in a six year old girl. J Pediatr 1968;73:251-3.
5Amos DB, Pool P. HLA-typing. In: Rose NR, Friedman H,
eds. Manual of clinical immunology. 2nd ed. Washington:
American Society for Microbiology, 1976:797-804.
6 Schuknecht HF. Further observation on the pathology of
presbycussis, Arch Otolaryngol 1964;80:369-82.
' Bretz GW, Baghdassarian A, Graber JD, Zacherle BJ,
Norwm RA, Blizzard RM. Coexistence of diabetes mellitus and
insipidus and optic atrophy in two siblings. Studies and review of
literature. Am J Med 1970;48:398-403.
8 Richardson JE, Hamilton W. Diabetes insipidus, diabetes
mellitus, optic atrophy, and deafness: 3 cases of 'DIDMOAD'
syndrome. Arch Dis Child 1977;52:796-8.
Page MM, Asmal AC, Edwards CR. Recessive inheritance of
diabetes: the syndrome of diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus,
optic atrophy and deafness. Q J Med 1976;69:505-20.
10 Monson JP, Boucher BJ. HLA-type and islet cell antibody
status in family with (Diabetes insipidus and mellitus, optic
atrophy and deafness) DIDMOAD syndrome. Lancet 1983;
i:1286-7.
" Deschamps I. Lestradet H, Schmid M, Hors J. HLA-DR2 and
DIDMOAD syndrome. Lancet 1983;ii:109.
12 Stanley CA, Spielman RS, Zmijewski CM, Baker L. Wolfram
syndrome not HLA-linked. N Engl J Med 1979;301:1398-9.
3 Miller M, Moses AM. Mechanisms of chlorpropamide action in
diabetes insipidus. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1970;30:488-96.
828 Najjar, Saikaly, Zaytoun, and Abdelnoor
4 Ettinger B, Frosham PH. Mechanism of chlorpropamide anti
diuresis in diabetes insipidus. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1970;
31:552-5.
'5 Lessell S, Rosman NP. Juvenile diabetes mellitus and optic
atrophy. Arch Neurol 1977;34:759-65.
16 Fraser FC, Gunn T. Diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus, and
optic atrophy. An autosomal recessive syndrome. J Med Genet
1977;14:190-3.
17 Niemeyer G, Marquardt JL. Retinal function in a unique
syndrome of optic atrophy, juvenile diabetes mellitus, insipidus,
neurosensory hearing loss, autonomic dysfunction, and hyper
alanineuria. Investigative Ophthalmology 1972;11:617-24.
18 Carson MJ, Slager UT, Steinberg RM. Simultaneous occurence
Fifty years ago
of diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus, and optic atrophy in a
brother and sister. Am J Dis Child 1977;131:1382-5.
19 Gunn T, Bortolussi R, Little JM, Andermann F, Fraser FC,
Belmonte MM. Juvenile diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy,
sensory nerve deafness and diabetes insipidus-a syndrome.
J Pediatr 1976;89:565-70.
20 Aragona F, Garat JM, Martinez E. Urological aspects of
Wolfram's syndrome. Eur Urol 1983;9:75-79.
Correspondence to Dr S S Najjar, Department of Paediatrics,
American University Medical Center, PO Box 113-6044, Beirut,
Lebanon.
Received 7 February 1985
90th birthday tribute to Sir Thomas Barlow: infantile scurvy
Arch Dis Child 1935;10:211-336
The bound Archives volume of 1935 looks notably fatter on the bookshelf than those of 1934 and 1936. It carried essays
occupying some 125 pages on various aspects of infantile scurvy. Four of these were written as a 90th birthday tribute to
the then 'doyen of British medicine', Sir Thomas Barlow. His original article 'On cases described as "acute rickets" which
are probably a combination of scurvey and rickets, the scurvey being an essential and the rickets a variable element' was
also included, being reprinted from the 1883 Medico-Chirurgical Transactions, London. Sir Thomas, who was one of
Jenner's assistants early in his medical career, made many contributions to the clinical medicine of adults as well as
children; but the more important was considered to be this recognition that the so called acute rickets was not rickets at all
but infantile scurvy, and that this in turn was akin to adult scurvy save for greater bone involvement.
One of his 'juniors', Lord Horder, wrote a brief introduction to the essays and described the great affection and hero
worship Sir Thomas aroused. During the course of his remarkable career, Sir Thomas was elected a Fellow of the Royal
Society, was President of the Royal College of Physicians, a Physician to the Royal Household, and Physician
Extraordinary to Queen Victoria, attending her in her last illness. He himself just failed to become a centenarian by a few
months.
PAMELA A DAVIES